---

Published: 2019-10-24

---

Whenever I ask myself "Did I get this right?" it could mean many things—Did this sentence read the way I think it should? Did this word mean this or that? Did I have enough context? Did I have to add or omit that? Did I get the right voice down? Did I misinterpret something?—There are countless more, but one sticks out more than most and I ask this every single time I read through my work: Did I feel the same way when I read it in Japanese?

_Don’t think! Feel!_ is quite honestly a good way to describe translation. You see words, you turn them to other words with similar effect. It’s much more complex than that of course, especially that you process two different languages while balancing a mix of voices (the author’s, yours, whoever edits it, and whoever else is there), but at the root of it all when you translate you go with what feels right at the time. Being in the moment and going off what you know, what you remember, what you were thinking, what or who you’re interacting with, what you were feeling. That last point, feeling, is what I believe what makes a translator.

Translating is a human endeavor. It’s hard and technical, it can be cathartic and relaxing, you can be just as wrong as you are right, and what I realized after doing more than enough translations for Wake Up, Girls! (WUG) stuff is that if I can’t resonate with the emotion the person is trying to communicate, I’m no better than a machine translator… well, maybe a small step above that but regardless, readable doesn’t always mean relatable.

Fan translators don’t usually have a direct link to their source where they can ask questions and smooth over ambiguities, so it’s almost impossible to fully understand what you’re translating especially when public vs. private personas come into play. You can easily over-inflate a sentiment or a off-hand gesture. You can read too much into a quirk that had only manifested once in the text but is actually a harmless habit. People can lie and hide their true emotions and there’s no way for you to confirm either way. We make do anyway and try to dive deeper into the rabbit hole taking as many notes as we can, hoping that the “things hidden between the lines” can fill in the gaps but that can only do so much.

So in a sense, fan translations, or more specifically, translations done without communication between source and translator, are leaps of faith. It’s scary and I think a lot of them lean toward more literal readings when it could be done differently because that is the safest bet, especially when people can call you out with their own equally leveled interpretation, which could also be both right and wrong.

That said, what isn’t entirely false and that I can trust is what I felt reading them in the original language. Emotion is a powerful thing and it’s often conveyed non-verbally. The words themselves give framework, intention gives direction, but emotion is what makes a translation feel “right” if not perfect. I mean it. At least for me, I just feel it. Things will always get lost or muddled along the way but if your words connect the reader to the original and resonate with them the same way it did to you then you’re on the right track. It’s hard to explain how a line makes you cry; it’s not always the word choice, flourishes, or the pacing, sometimes it’s the sentiment the entire piece brings with it as things fall into place and communicating that is hard. But if you get it right, it’s quite possibly the best feeling in the world. That in your own way, you did it justice.

Of course, this is only one of many approaches to translation and it is just as important when not to lean too much into emotion that your will overpowers the author’s and ends up distorting the text. But I think it doesn’t hurt to apply your own emotional value to it, even if it means going “off-script,” because you’re a person too who felt something—inspiration, sentiment, whatever you wish to call it—when you experienced it yourself and quite possibly, it’s the one thing that drove you to translate it in the first place.
