---

Published: 2022-11-01

---

It's the classic Catch-22. To work on projects, you need to get better, but to get better you need experience, valuable experience at that, and the best place to get it is through working on projects. Oversimplification aside, that's what I used to think—and I still do to some extent, which I'll get into later—but what really helped me grow as a translator wasn't the amount of "work" I did, it's knowing whether I was doing it right or not.

Feedback is essential to improve as a translator. You can hunker down, study, and practice _ad infinitum_, but you'll never get anywhere without a proper mechanism telling you how well you're doing. For those starting out, however, you'll immediately discover how hard that is to find or even trust, especially with how isolating translating can be. It's one of its most frustrating aspects—the most accessible feedback is noisy and difficult to parse, the most valuable ones are few and far between, and it will always be subjective and conflicting. Random people on the internet are quick on the draw yet miss frequently, and people who know better tend to be too busy to be available.

It's understandable, though. Giving proper feedback takes time and significant effort. Almost twice as much as actual translation work at worst. Not only do you have to know what's "right" and "wrong", conveying encouraging and actionable advice is not easy. Having things pointed out to you is sometimes the best you can get but there has to be constructive criticism given as to why that is. Not everyone can do it well and everyone reacts to it differently.

"This translation is great/sucks" won't tell you anything, but if you manage to get those precious morsels of "I love how you did X, but I don't think you got Y quite right because Z" you quickly find yourself improving by leaps and bounds. It's not necessarily affirmation or getting a pat on the back, it's part of becoming an expert—Repeated attempts with feedback. ([Among other things, as Veritasium points out, but I'm focusing on this aspect](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5eW6Eagr9XA).)

In my experience, these are reliable sources of feedback. They come with caveats and its best used in combination with others:

**Yourself.** Depending on the type of person you are, this is surprisingly powerful but it takes discipline and can be a slippery slope for some. You only know what you know and you don't know enough, so it's easy to obsess over details that may not even matter. But channel that obsession and hesitation into ideas, and you have something to base every piece of criticism on, developing a "style" that adjusts and shifts based on the response you get. My only advice regarding this is to be open and honest. You should know what kind of translator you want to become and work toward it.

**Editors.** This is more when you're in the thick of things but trust your editor. They're a second pair of eyes and they're specifically there to help you, or at very least, improve the piece you're working on. Every editor test I've taken emphasizes that. In fact, [here's a guide about how to provide effective queries that I got as reference material](https://www.councilscienceeditors.org/wp-content/uploads/v36n3p78.pdf) (_The Art of Writing Effective Queries_ by Diana Burke).

To give an example, I worked on a project with a proactive editor who gave feedback after every chapter. I was new to the genre so I fumbled around with ideas and made note of potentially glaring issues and surprisingly, the first of three rounds of feedback pointed out every single one of those. That told me I was on the right track and my suspicions were sound. The second round came with requests for minor tweaks, and the third came with a "I barely had to change anything" which is always a good thing to hear. I could have just adjusted right from the start but I didn't have the confidence to do so as I've never done it before; I might overcompensate and end up with something I didn't intend to write. Having my editor confirm my ideas is what got me to improve right away.

**Friends and peers.** I've mostly been on the "giving" end of these but communities are important. They're your support system and a secondary source of information, sometimes even primary for obscure topics. Don't be afraid to ask for advice or have your work checked by your peers, just be aware that you're all different people in the same boat. All hustling, trying to make sense of things, dealing with life, taxes, and NDAs. So while their feedback is valuable, it might not apply to you all the time.

**Random internet folks**. They're actually good at spot-checking; so many eyes, if something slips through (good and bad), they'll see it. It's not that they're wholly unreliable sources of feedback, it's just that it's noisy and rather shallow. You need to be tuned with the crowd to truly understand what's going on because it's often not what they say, it's what they mean. And once you're deep enough in the localization process, most of the opinions don't apply as much anymore. It's not for everyone.

**Mentorship.** I'll mention this but I've never experienced it as its huge time investment makes not easy to come by for my generation. At best you see this in the literary and academic side of translation. However, you will see openings from peers come up every once in a while so keep an eye out for those. That said, if you do get a chance to pick someone's translator brain, do it. Ask questions and take risks.

And finally, take **translation tests**. Feedback from these is refreshingly blunt, so if there's an idea I'd like to test, I do it here. At best, you get the job. At the very least, you get direct feedback from someone who knows better, and sometimes you just need to know right away if an idea works or not. Failing sucks but there's no harm in trying (I come out thinking I'd fail anyway) and you'll improve because they showcase the kind of work you'll be doing, which is hard to replicate on your own. It can be obtuse at times, and you might not even get feedback, but the experience and exposure count. You'll pass eventually and it's off the back of those failures. Highly recommended and if you're the proactive sort, it'll give you ideas on which avenues to pursue.

Now, the crux of all this is how you receive feedback. This is tough because it's down to how you trust your process. There is merit to being stubborn as well as being malleable. And echo chambers exist where you get the same thing over and over again, giving you a skewed perspective. Feedback is just there to give you a response. It's up to you to parse it into something actionable and sometimes that means not listening to it. All I can say is to never shy away from chances to obtain it. Actively seek it and it will help you in ways you never thought possible.
